CHARACTER ATTRIBUTES
====================

Each player may adjust the following attributes:

Casting speed. This controls the speed at which the magic wheels (both casting
and counterspell) rotate. The default is 0.5 revolutions per second. Players
may control this freely; higher speeds increase the rate at which players can
build spells, at the cost of making it harder to select the correct effects.

Charge speed. This controls the rate (in percent/sec) at which mana is drained
into a spell effect. The default is 15. Players may control this freely; higher
values allow for quicker spell casting, but make it harder to conserve mana.

Available spell effects. The player may map any combination of spell effects
into his 8 slots, provided at least 2 slots contain terminal effects. By
default is Fire, Shock, Heal, Heal, Missile, Missile, Spread, Spread.

Targetting style. Can be selected from Sorceror (default), Wizard, Warlock, and
Druid.

SPELL CASTING
=============

Spell casting consists of three steps: Targetting, construction, and
release. During the construction phase, any enemy targets have the ability to
counterspell and untarget themselves.

Targetting
----------

Targetting is the act of binding the caster to their desired target(s). Every
player has a single primary targetter, triggered with the primary-fire control,
and a couple of free targetters that have dedicated controls.

Primary Targetters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sorceror. Primary fire shots a small spread of invisible projectiles
forward. The first creature hit becomes the target, regardless of friend or
foe. Neither inanimate objects nor empty space can be targetted. This is the
default for new players because it is the simplest to use. It is also
advantageous in close quarters.

Wizard. Primary fire shoots a single invisible projectile directly forward. The
first creature or surface hit becomes the target, regardless of friend or
foe. Empty space cannot be targetted. This is most advantageous in open areas
at medium range, and also makes it possible to create uncounterable
area-of-effect spells by targetting a surface near another player.

Warlock. Primary fire shoots a single *visible* projectile which is controlled
by the caster as long as primary fire is held. When primary fire is released or
a surface or creature is hit, that becomes the target of the spell. This is
usable at great range, and permits casting spells even at targets not in
line-of-sight, but is virtually unusable in close quarters.

Druid. Primary fire creates a visible circle which expans as long as primary
fire is held. All enemies within the circle when primary fire is released are
targetted. The caster cannot move while targetting or constructing.

Secondary Targetters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The null targetter. Available to everyone but Druids. The target location of
beam, local beam, and existential shaped effects is the location of release.
The target location of otherwise shaped effects is a point infinitely far from
the location of release, in the direction the caster was pointing when the
spell was released.

The group targetter. Available only for Druids, replacing the self targetter.
Targets all friendly non-Druids within 6 metres.

Construction
------------

Once targets have been established, the caster is presented with the casting
wheel, initially with only one ring, divided into eight segments, mapped in
order to the player's eight spell effects.

Initially, a pointer moves clockwise around the ring at the casting speed until
primary fire is pressed. At this point, the pointer stops, and the spell effect
under the pointer is selected, and mana is moved from the player's pool into
that effect until primary fire is released.

If the effect is non-terminal, another ring is added around the previous, and
the pointer continues around that ring starting from its former location in the
inner ring. Each concentric ring contracts the divisions for each spell effect
by 10%, leaving a "dead space" counterclockwise of each effect. Furthermore,
slots already used in the spell become dead areas.

When a terminal event is selected, the spell is released.

The spell is lost if a dead area is selected, the spell is successfully
countered by all targets, or the caster runs out of mana charging a
non-terminal effect. In this case, 90% of the mana spent on the spell is
returned to the caster.  Running out of mana while charging a terminal effect
simply releases the spell.

Counterspell
------------

When a player is targetted by an enemy, a counterspell wheel is shown, whose
pointer rotates at the caster's casting speed. As the caster selects spell
effects, the effects are revealed on the corresponding counterspell rings, in
the same positions. Unlike the casting wheel, slots on the counterspell wheel
do not contract in concentric rings.

Secondary fire will select the region under the pointer in *all* counterspell
wheels. Selecting items on the counterspell wheel functions the same way as
with casting a spell. If, at the time that the actual spell is released, the
counterspell wheel contains the same spell, the spell is countered. Certain
effects may allow a spell to be countered after release.

Release
-------

The exact effect of release depends on the stack of spell effects cast.

SPELL PROPERTIES
================

Termination
-----------

A spell effect is "terminal" if is the final effect in the spell. Non-terminal
spell effects are always followed by more spell effects, and are said to
"contain" those spell effects.

Shape
-----

Every terminal spell effect has a "shape", which describes how its effects
propagate and are distributed between the point of origin (the caster, if a
containing non-terminal does not change it) and the target, and what it means
for the effect to be "expanded".

Sphere: The effect is distributed over a spherical volume. It is initially
centred on the point of origin, but converges toward the target, even after the
target moves. Objects which contact the sphere absorb part of the effect
proportional to the volume they occupy. Enlarging the effect simply enlarges
the sphere.

Cone: If the point of origin is the same as the target, behaves the same as a
sphere. Otherwise, the effect begins at the point of origin, and then manifests
as an expanding disc moving towards the target, aligned perpendicular to its
direction of movement. Objects with contact the disc take part of the spell
effect, absorbing an amount proportional to the area of the disc they
cover. Enlarging a cone increases the rate of expansion of the disc.

Arc: Acts similarly to a cone that advances its disc instantaneously. Upon
contact with an object, the cone restarts from that point (as if that were the
point of origin) and resumes travel to the target. Enlarging an arc is the same
as enlarging a cone.

Beam: The effect advances infinitely upward from the point of origin, then
descends from infinity onto the target, being blocked by any obstructions. The
size is simply a cylinder centred on the target; enlargement directly affects
this area.

Local Beam. Like Beam, but is not subject to obstruction if the point of origin
is the same as the target.

Existential: The effect simply exists at the target. Enlargement is
meaningless.

Points
------

Each effect has a point of origin and an effective target. The spell as a whole
has a true target. Usually, the point of origin is the caster, and the
effective target is the true target, though some non-terminal effects change
this.

Colour/Element
--------------

Each effect is associated with one of Godai, typically referred to by its
representative colour. The list of elements is below. A mapping is provided to
Wu Xing for compatibility for mapping elements from the Chinese Zodiac. There
are additionally two non-elemental colours.

Colour          Godai           Wu Xing         Non-Elemental
Red             Fire            Fire            -
Green           Earth           Metal           -
Blue            Water           Water           -
Violet          Wind            Wood            -
White           Sky             Earth           -
Black           -               -               Space
Grey            -               -               Time

Zodiac Sign/Group
-----------------

Each spell effect is in one of four groups:
I       Positive/neutral terminals (yang)
II      Neutral/negative terminals (yin)
III     Lesser non-terminal        (yang)
IV      Greater non-terminal       (yin)

Colour/Group pairs are unique per spell effect. Applicable colour/group pairs
are also mapped somewhat clumsily to signs of the Chinese Zodiac as follows:

        I       II      III     IV
Fire    -       Snake   Horse   Goat
Earth   Monkey  Rooster Dog     -
Water   -       Boar    Rat     Ox
Wind    Tiger   Rabbit  Dragon  -
Sky     -       -       -       -
Space   -       -       -       -
Time    -       -       -       -

SPELL EFFECTS
=============

        I               II              III             IV
Fire    Haste           Fire            Spread          Amplify
Earth   Shield          Silence         Resist          Delay
Water   Defelect        Frost           Conical         Brainwash
Wind    Push            Shock           Missile         Instantaneity
Sky     Heal            Soul Trap       Absorb Life     Death Blow
Time    Time Reverse    Time Loan       Linger          Permanency
Space   Dimension Door  Wonderland      Enchant         Wormhole

Haste
-----

Terminal, local bean, group I (positive), fire. The target's physical speed is
increased by 100% of the target's natural physical speed for some duration.
Mana quantity dictates duration.

Fire
----

Terminal, sphere, group II (negative), fire (Snake). Deals fire damage to
targets, which reduces health (more so than other elemental damage). Mana
quantity dictates total damage dealt.

Spread
------

Non-terminal, group III, fire (Horse). Enlarges the next effect in the chain
which is enlargeable. Mana quantity dictates enlargement factor.

Amplify
-------

Non-terminal, group IV, fire (Goat). Container with arc shape. Spells from
casters aligned with the caster of this effect which contain effects contained
by this effect have those effects amplified for some duration. Multiple
Amplifies affecting the same effect stack additively. N Amplify effects exactly
cancel n Resist effects affecting the same effect (sort of "additively"). Mana
quantity dictates duration.

Shield
------

Terminal, existential, group I (positive), earth (Monkey). Creates a physical
barrier around the target which absorbs any elemental damage that the caster
would take. The shield expires after a few seconds. If it absorbs too much
damage during this time, it disintegrates and 50% of damage absorbed is
delivered to the target. Mutiple shields on the same target distribute their
damage evenly per instance, regardless of relative strengths/remaining
time. Mana quantity dictates maximum damage absorbed.

Silence
-------

Terminal, beam, group II (negative), earth (Rooster). Mana that would be spent
by the target casting a spell is instead absorbed by this spell. Mana quantity
dictates mana absorbed. Absorbtion amount naturally decays quickly.

Resist
------

Non-terminal, group III, earth (Dog). Container with local beam shape. The
contained non-terminal does not effect target, and has its negative/positive
attribute inverted. Instead, the target will be immune to any instance of that
effect of equal or lower potency from an oposingly aligned caster (relative to
the caster of the Resist effect) for some duration, including all non-terminals
between the nested terminal and the Resist. Duration is dictated by mana
quantity.

Examples:

Resist-Resist-Heal gives the target resistence to Resist and Heal
effects from the target's allies, but has no effect if the target is aligned
with the caster.

A player from team A casts Resist-Resist-Push on a player from team B. Spells
from teams other than team B are unaffected. Players on team B, including the
victim, will have difficulty affecting the victim with spells containing either
Resist or Push.

A player from team A casts Resist-Resist-Push on himself. Spells from other
team A players are unaffected. Spells from players on other teams are resisted
if they contain Resist or Push.

Delay
-----

Non-terminal, group IV, earth. A container with a local beam shape. After some
delay, the containee is released, targetted at all creatures aligned oposing
the caster within some radius of the original target, including the original
target if applicable. The mana of the containee is distributed equally to each
instance of the containee (or lost if there are no applicable targets),
multiplied by some factor. The effect and its containee are lost if the
original target is destroyed. Until the Delay releases its container, the
target may continue to counter the spell as a whole. The Delay and its contents
are lost if its target is not aligned oposing the caster. Mana quantity
dictates radius, delay, and mana multiplier.

Deflect
-------

Terminal, local beam, group I (positive), water. For some duration, the target
becomes immune to point-based targetting by enemies (ie, all enemy targetting
except from druids). Mana quantity dictates duration.

Frost
-----

Terminal, cone, group II (negative), water (Boar). Deals frost damage to
targets, which reduces health and temporarily slows the player's cast rate (for
purposes of both casting and counterspell). Mana quantity dictates total damage
dealt and duration of cast rate degradation.

Conical
-------

Non-terminal, group III, water (Rat). Container which acts as a cone terminal
effect. Upon contact with an object, the nested spell (reduced to the
proportion of mana that would be absorbed were this an actual terminal effect)
is released upon the contacted object, with a point of origin and effective
target equal to the point where this occurred. This effect ignores its
effective target, always using the true target. Mana quantity indicates the
maximum distance the cone can travel before the spell is lost.

Brainwash
---------

Non-terminal, group IV, water (Ox). Container with beam shape. The containee is
considered neutral. The chain of contained effects replaces the first n effects
in the target's cast wheel for some duration. Eg, Brainwash-Enlarge-Push would
replace slot 0 with Enlarge and slot 1 with Push. Such changes to the cast
wheel (both when the spell takes effect and when it ceases) interrupt casting,
dispelling any in-progress spell. The duration that each effect lasts is
dictated by the mana quantity given to Brainwish multiplied by the mana
quantity given to that effect.

Push
----

Terminal, sphere, group I (neutral), wind (Tiger). Affected objects are pushed
away from the centre of the sphere. Objects at the centre of the sphere are
pushed in the direction the caster is facing. This effect can be used to move
over land quickly or to fly. Mana quantity dictates force.

Shock
-----

Terminal, arc, group II (negative), wind (Rabbit). Deals shock damage to
targets, which reduces health and temporarily introduces additional dead areas
to the player's cast and counterspell wheels. Mana quantity dictates total
damage dealt and duration of dead areas.

Missile
-------

Non-terminal, group III, wind (Dragon). Container which acts as a sphere
terminal effect. Upon contact with an object, the nested spell is released in
its natural form, except that beams become spheres, with a point of origin and
effective target equal to the point where this occurred. This effect ignores
its effective target, always using the true target. Mana quantity dictates
maximum distance the missile can travel before it spontaneously releases its
contents.

Instantaneity
-------------

Non-terminal, group IV, wind. Container which acts as an arc-shaped spell. Upon
reaching its maximum distance, its containee is lost. On contact with objects,
copies of the containee are spawned targetted at those objects. Mana of the
containee is distributed across the spawned containees according to the normal
rules for arc-shaped effects. Mana quantity dictates maximum range.

Heal
----

Terminal, beam, group I (positive), sky. Restores the targets' health. Mana
quantity dictates total amount healed.

Soul Trap
---------

Termial, arc, group II (negative), sky. For some duration after effecting a
target, if that target dies, the caster is followed by a spirit containing mana
equal to the target's mana at time of death. As long as the spirits exist, they
will add an additional percentage equal to 1/4th the percentage of mana the
target had remaining at time of death to every spell effect cast by the
original caster, relative to the amount of mana input by the caster himself,
except for other Soul Trap effects. Furthermore, such spirits will slowly drain
the health of the caster they follow as long as they exist. The spirits cease
to exist when their mana quantity becomes zero. Mana quantity dictates the
duration.

A Soul Trap effect (including the spirits) is nullified upon the caster's
death.

Absorb Life
-----------

Non-terminal, group III, sky (Dragon). Contained spell effects draw some
portion of energy from health instead of mana. Mana quantity dictates this
portion (asymptotically reaching 0:1 mana:health as mana spent on this effect
increases). Mana derived from health is colourless, so this effect also dilutes
the colour of mana used.

Death Blow
----------

Non-terminal, group IV, sky. When constructing contained spell effects, the
caster's health is also used as a mana source, with the same colour as their
mana pool. Ratio between the two is equal to the ratio between percent health
remaining and percent mana remaining; ie, if the caster has 50% health and 25%
mana, 66% is drawn from health and 33% from mana. If damage caused directly by
any effect in the contained sub-spell kills the target within some duration of
the casting, all health consumed (but not mana) by this effect is restored.
Otherwise, the caster is killed (considered to be by the target if the target
is an enemy; suicide otherwise). If the spell is countered, mana is restored as
normal, but health is not. Mana quantity dictates duration before deadline.

Time Reverse
------------

Terminal, local beam, group I (positive), time. The target ceases to exist in
its current instantiation. A new instance of the target spawns some distance in
the past, with the same state target at the time the effect takes place. Time
for the new instantiation in the past proceeds at double speed until its time
is synchronised with that of the outside world.

Paradoxes are prevented by using a two-level event system. Events produced by
the "in the past" player are still time-stamped as occuring at the player's
real time, but are forwarded to a lower context at an offset. Thus, changes to
the past after the time the spell takes effect do not change the initial state
of the new past instantitation. This is essentially the "multiple worlds"
interpretation of time travel.

Players "in the past" cannot interact with game objectives.

Time Reverse has no effect on targets that are still "in the past". Mana
quantity dictates the distance into the past travelled.

Time Loan
---------

Terminal, local beam, group II (negative), time. When the effect begins on the
target, health and mana on the target increase by 100%, becoming greater than
or equal to 100% normal capacity. Maximum capacity of each attribute is
increased by 100%. Additionally, the effect starts with a withdrawal counter of
0 for each attribute. During the spell duration, any expenditure of either
attribute while that attribute is below 100% capacity increases the
corresponding withdrawal counter by that amount. When the duration expires,
both attributes reduce their maximum capacity by 100%, and their values are
reduced by 100% capacity, plus 10% of the respective withdrawal counters
(rounded up). If either becomes non-positive as a result, the target
automatically dies. If, when the effect starts, another Time Loan is already in
effect, the original Time Loan has its duration extended by the duration of the
new effect, and the new effect is nullified. Mana quantity dictates duration.

Linger
------

Non-terminal, group III, time. Energy in the sub-spell is released over a
period of time instead of at its natural rate. Effects which reach their target
stay with it; others remain in whatever place they were when they would
naturally have ceased to exist. Linger cannot be nested; attempting to do so
nullifies the spell. A Time Leap nested below a Linger has no effect. Mana
quantity dictates duration of lingering.

Permanency
----------

Non-terminal, group IV, time. When the contained sub-spell is nullified or has
run its course, mana is drawn from the caster to reconstitute a new instance of
the spell (ie, just the sub-spell) with a point of origin equal the caster.
Reconstitution is delayed if necessary such that reconstitution will not occur
more than once per second (in chronological terms of the target; eg,
Permanency-TimeLeap will transport the target into the future, and then delay
one second after that).

Permanency is nullified when the mana source ceases to exist, has insufficient
mana to renew the spell, or becomes too far separated from the effective target
of the sub-spell. Mana quantity dictates the maximum separation between mana
source and sub-spell target. The target can counterspell the spell containing
permanency even after it is released. Reconstituted sub-spells are not
themselves subject to counterspell, but are countered if the permanency is
countered.

Dimension Door
--------------

Terminal, local beam, group I (neutral), space. The target is shunted a certain
distance on the (X,Z) plane in the direction they are facing, regardless of
whether there are any obstacles in the way. Momentum and terrain-relative Y
coordinate are preserved. If this would leave the target within a solid object
or a creature, the distance is progressively reduced until the problem is
resolved or the distance becomes zero. Mana quantity dictates distance.

Wonderland
----------

Terminal, sphere, group II (negative), space. For some duration, the target
perceives the world to be eight times larger (or, graphically, that he is 1/8th
size), though in reality the target's size is unchanged. The instant this
effect takes effect, the velocity of the player is quartered to compensate, and
is similarly quadrupled when the effect ceases. Spells released during the
duration of this effect behave according to the distorted coordinate system,
even after this effect ceases. Mana quantity dictates duration.

Enchant
-------

Non-terminal, group III, space. The contained sub-spell is stored on the
target, and is released when a creature comes within a certain radius of the
enchanted target (with a point of origin equal to the target, and an effective
target of the creature that triggered it), which destroys the enchantment. Mana
quantity dictates the duration before the spell becomes nullified.

Wormhole
--------

Non-terminal, group IV, space. The contained spell has a chance of ignoring the
first solid non-target non-ground object it encounters. Mana quantity dictates
the probability.

Artefacts
=========

Artefacts are indestructable items dropped by players and creatures upon
death, except for suicides. Each Artefact is aligned with the team whose player
caused the death; players can only manpulate Artefacts aligned with their team.
Artefacts can be assembled into Circle, which can be used for traps, support,
etc. A Circle essentially casts a particular spell in a particular situation,
whenever that situation arises.

There are five classes of artefacts: Foci, Wells, Tokens, Sigils, and Charms.

A Focus determines the conditions under which a Circle's spell will be cast and
how it will be targetted (eg, "enemy within 5m").

A Well determines the conditions necessary for a Circle's spell to be cast (eg,
"has not cast within last 10s") and how much mana is put into each spell
component.

Each Token or Sigil represents one spell component. Tokens correspond to zodiac
signs, whereas Sigils correspond to components with no zodiac sign, and are
less common. Tokens and Sigils are considered terminal or non-terminal,
according to their spell component. There is no mechanical difference between
the two, so further discussion will only consider Tokens.

Charms modify Tokens/Sigils to which they are immediately adjacent. Each Charm
is associated with an mana Colour and a strength; the Tokens/Sigils modified
are strengthened/weakened according to the effects that changing the mana
Colour input according to that streangth and colour has on the spell effect of
the Token/Sigil.

A Circle consists of exactly one Focus, exactly one Well, exactly one terminal
Token/Sigil, any number of non-terminal Tokens/Sigils, and any number of
Charms.

A Circle begins with a Well and a Focus which are immediately adjacent in the
cardinal directions; the Well-Focus vector becomes the initial direction of the
circle. The Circle is built by starting from the Focus, and iteratively moving
to the first Token/Sigil or Well which may be found within 10m by scanning
counterclockwise from the current direction. From there, the direction changes
to the direction of the jump made. When a Well is reached, it must be the Well
paired with the original Focus. If the direction makes a full rotation relative
to the Well-Focus vector, no circle is formed. A circle that would be
one-dimensional is invalid. All Tokens/Sigils must be non-terminal except for
the last, which is terminal. The spell that is constructed is derived by simply
iterating the Tokens/Sigils in this order.

Circle examples (T=terminal, N=non-terminal):

  WF    WFN       WF   NC
   T     T        T    N

Non-circle examples:

  W F   Well and Focus must be adjacent
   T

  WFT   Circles may not be linear

  WF
   N    Final compoment must be terminal

  WF
  TT    Non-final components must be non-terminal

  WF
  WT    Non-matching Well encountered

  W       F
  T


          N     Circle follows spiral, making a full revolution without
                finding the Well.
  N   T

  N       N

